###Overview

Satoshi Nakamoto outlined some of  the reasons for creating Bitcoin in his  whitepaper.  Bitcoin was created as an alternative to the existing centralized financial institutions.  Satoshi believed that there were several problematic aspects to the current centralized system.  The Bitcoin vision was to have a distributed, decentralized cryptocurrency.  It was to be based on, “cryptographic proof instead of trust”.  With Bitcoin, there would be no need for a trusted third party.  The weight of a peer-to-peer distributed network would serve as a means to record all transactions and protect users from the double-spending problem.  Bitcoin was created as open source software, and the code resides on Github.  Anyone interested can see the code.

How does Bitcoin work?  A transaction in Bitcoin starts with a wallet, from which you can create an account and have a place to perform transactions.  There are several different kinds of wallets, but they all allow you to perform the same core actions.  The process starts when you create an account with your wallet.  Once your account is established, you will be able to perform transactions on the Bitcoin network.  Assuming you have Bitcoin to spend and you want to transfer some Bitcoin to another account, you create a transaction by providing an account number to transfer the Bitcoin to along with the amount you want to transfer.  Your wallet then broadcasts the transaction to the Bitcoin network.  Eventually (in about 10 minutes) your transaction will be combined into a block (of other recently made transactions) which is then added to the blockchain.
Each transaction is distributed across all the computers participating in the Bitcoin network as part of the blockchain.  The blockchain acts as the Bitcoin ledger.  It is a chain of blocks that are linked in sequential order. A block is comprised of four parts: the size of the block, a block header, a transaction count, and a list of transactions in the block.  The Block header is structured to include: a bitcoin version number (in case of a change in the blockchain), a double SHA256 hash of the previous block header, a hash of all transactions in the current block, a timestamp indicating when the block was created, the difficulty target for the block, and the nonce.

Anyone in the network can view the blockchain and see all of the previous transactions that have taken place. Current transactions are compiled every ten minutes or so into a block of transactions.  The block is then finalized by a lucky bitcoin miner and added to the blockchain. This miner gets a bitcoin from the confirmation of the transaction and also pays the transaction fee. Because everyone on the Bitcoin network has access to a copy of the blockchain, it is difficult to change a transaction that has taken place.  As a transaction settles deeper into the blockchain it becomes even harder.
This hardness as you go deeper and deeper into the layer of the blockchain can be thought of as a layer of thin ice over a much more permanent and deeper layer of hard ice that makes up the foundation. You can easily break the ice on top, but you cannot break and get through the hard, permanent ice underneath the first few layers of ice on top. This is analogous to the nature of the blockchain, where the thin layer on top are the last few most recent transactions that the entire community of Bitcoin users can change if transactions go wrong or more transactions are added. The deeper layers of ice are analogous to the deeper levels of the blockchain where transactions cannot be changed. This allows for a constant source of truth per transaction to be derived from the existing blockchain that can be used to reconcile discrepancies between individuals competing for mined bitcoins.
